Meeting ID: KfiJSICX-mo
Source file: KfiJSICX-mo.mp3
Model: faster-whisper small.en (device=cpu, compute_type=int8)
Date note: Jan 30, 2018 Selectmen
Audio duration: 8905.080s ([02:28:25])
Note: transcribed in 3 chunks then stitched
Chunk absolute starts (ffmpeg -ss): 0.000s, 2966.360s, 5934.720s

--- Transcript ---

[00:00:02] Welcome to the Hingham Board of Selection meeting for Tuesday evening, January 30, 2018. We're actually coming to you from the second floor, and that's because later in the evening, we will be joined by Hingham's advisory committee and our community preservation committee, who will be preparing and reviewing their recommendations for community preservation funding for the next fiscal year.
[00:00:29] Prior to that, we do not have any minutes for approval. Any public comment on items not on the agenda? If not, for the next 45 minutes or so, we will be conducting three interviews for police, patrolmen positions. We have three candidates. Each candidate will come in individually.
[00:00:55] The board will have an opportunity to ask some questions. The board will take up the appointment of the patrolmen at our meeting next week. So, Chief and Deputy Chief, you're ready to go? Yes. Okay, could you ask Mr. Campanelli to come in, please?
[00:01:27] Hi, Mr. Campanelli. Thanks for coming in. Very nice to meet you. Welcome. Nice to meet you. Very nice to meet you. How are you, sir? Paul Healy. Very nice to meet you, sir. Very nice to meet you. Mr. Campanelli, if you want to take a seat right over there. Thank you so much for coming in this evening. Thank you for having me. So, this evening, what we're going to do, we're going to take, you know, 10 or 15 minutes, and the way we'd like to structure this interview is give you an opportunity first to introduce
[00:01:53] yourself to the board, tell us a little bit about you and your interest in the position, and then each one of the three of us will ask you a couple of questions, and then at the very end, we'll give you the opportunity to either ask us any questions that you have or make any additional points that you want to make sure the board is aware of. So, that's kind of the sequence for this evening. If you could start and tell us a little bit about you. Sure.
[00:02:18] Good evening. My name is Derek Campanelli. I was born and raised right next door in Allwall, Massachusetts. I grew up there, went to high school there, graduated in 2006. From that point, I went over to Roger Williams University down in Rhode Island and studied criminal justice. I earned a bachelor's degree and a master's degree in criminal justice.
[00:02:44] While I was in school there, I did a few internships, one with the Barnsville County Police Department and also one for the Massachusetts State Police Underwater Recovery Unit and Marine Section. After completing my degrees at Roger Williams, I moved back to Allwall and worked as a front desk clerk for the police station there.
[00:03:09] After about a year or so doing that, I ended up taking a full-time police officer position with the County of Maui out in Hawaii, attended a nine-month intensive police academy out there. I was on the road for a few months and just about at the year mark of moving out there, I realized that I miss home, so I ended up coming back and I moved to Hingham.
[00:03:34] From that point, I went and attended a police academy at the Plymouth Reserve Academy down in Plymouth. From that point, I've been working as a special police officer for the town in Allwall and also as a front desk clerk for the police station there. I've pretty much been around Hingham all my life, I'm huge into Revolutionary War reenacting,
[00:04:00] so you may have seen me marching by on the 4th of July parade just as a red coat reenactor and that's pretty much my story. Thank you. Thank you. On a day like today, you must miss Hawaii. Just a little bit. Just a little bit. Paul, maybe you'd like to start with a question or two. Sure. Mr. Campanella, your accomplishments, in my opinion, are impressive.
[00:04:28] I notice you also hold a pilot's license? Yes, sir, that is correct. What kind of plane are you licensed to fly? I'm licensed in mostly small single engine aircraft from Cessna's to Piper Warriors and Piper Archers. I have about, I think, 140 pilot in command hours of those types of aircraft and that
[00:04:54] was something that I worked on while I was at school to try to broaden my horizons a little bit and try to teach me about communication skills and multitasking and being able to talk to air traffic control and fly a plane and do everything all at once. I think that helped a little bit. Did you complete the nine month academy that you referenced in Hawaii?
[00:05:21] Yes, sir, I did. All right. And did you do any street work out there? Will you do any academy? I completed two full months of the FTO program out there. There was another two phases that I was in the process of completing, but at that point I had realized that I miss Massachusetts a lot. I miss the community being 13 hours by flight from my family and friends and everything
[00:05:52] that I knew. It just kind of came down a little heavy on me and I realized that I still wanted to be a police officer, but I didn't want to continue the career out there in Hawaii. Do you have police officers in your family? Yes, sir. Who would that be? My uncle is a retired lieutenant with the state police. My older brother is a homicide detective down in Florida for ten years and he's currently
[00:06:23] with the FBI task force out of Miami, Florida. My twin brother is also a special police officer for the town of Nowal for a number of years. Parents must be proud. Yes, sir.
[00:06:38] Do you have an opinion or do you hold one with respect to the most significant battle of the revolution in the southern parts of the country? Do I personally hold an opinion? I believe it was the battle of Yorktown when they surrendered. The sword was presented to a Hingham resident by the name of Lincoln.
[00:07:07] Thank you very much. Thank you, sir. Last question.
[00:07:13] Yeah, yeah, very well done. I would concur with my colleague, Mr. Healy, that you have a very impressive resume, Mr. Campanelli, and I just have a couple questions for you. Sure. I was particularly impressed with your educational background. You shared a little bit about that with all of us and with the public tonight. I'm just wondering, in terms of your education, how do you think that that's helped shape you as a candidate now for a police officer job in Hingham?
[00:07:40] The thing about my resume that I think has helped quite a bit was I've gained a lot of experience with a lot of different departments from county police agencies like the Barnsville County Police Department with a small town of Noel that I'm very familiar with, and then with a large city department like that out in Maui, Hawaii, I kind of can take all those experiences and then add the state police experience and kind of narrowed it down
[00:08:09] to I want something bigger than Noel, but not too big. Something that can still be a small community, a community where you can know everyone by name, where you can see the same faces over and over again, kind of like a community that you'd almost see in a Norman Rockwell painting or illustration. That's the type of police officer that I want to be, is one that knows the
[00:08:36] community and is deeply tied with the community, rather than one that you never see the same people twice, but then at the same time that the department's not too small, that there's no room for moving up and later on in years. Right, and I feel like, you know, your decision to move back, your answer just now, it seems like you place a high value on the community around you,
[00:09:01] and I think that is a value shared by the Hingham Police Department. You know, unfortunately, the Hingham Police Department sees not only the Norman Rockwell, Tableau, Hingham in the Square, but, you know, a lot of other stuff going on, not only in Hingham, but around the South Shore, and, you know, that's why I think we're so thorough in our hiring process, because you play a pivotal role in terms
[00:09:26] of developing community trust, I think, in the department and in its officers, but also in enforcing the laws, and it's sort of a tough balance, and I wonder if you can talk a little bit about, you know, how you would pursue that balance. That is a tough balance, but I believe the best way about going about that would be the aspect of community policing and being able to take a proactive
[00:09:58] approach to policing, so with community policing, instead of just being completely reactive to everything that happens with the town, with the residents, you can kind of educate people, and you can tie the community into the police department, so that way, when police officers come to the residence of some home, you're more familiar and able to help the police officer, then at the same time, you're
[00:10:26] going to be eliminating some of the calls for service, hopefully, and reducing, hopefully, fatalities from automobile accidents with programs like the designated driver program or the saved by the adult program, where you encourage people to be wearing seat belts, and you teach them about that, and that's going to cut down quite a bit, too. Great, and one final question, and you touched on
[00:10:56] this a little bit in your discussion with Paul, but, you know, again, the other thing that jumps out about your resume, I think, is the number of sort of different experiences that you've had, the kind of hobbies that you've pursued, and I'm wondering if you can either pull from one of those experiences or give them a chance to be a police officer in Hawaii, or if you have a challenge that you may have encountered in your life that you have overcome that, again, sort of shape you as a person to be a police officer in Hingham.
[00:11:24] One thing that comes to mind for some reason when you ask, is one of my thoughts of the patrol shifts out in Hawaii one day, when we got into the cruiser, my FTL, and myself, and we started our shift, and just all of a sudden we realized that there was a spider about the size of my hand that was on the front windshield of the cruiser, so we both jumped out of the
[00:11:51] cruiser, we put it in the park, and we jumped out, and the spiders out there, they're not only big, but they're poisonous, so if they bite you, your feet, your hands will swell up, you won't even know it until you notice the injury, but so we jumped out of the cruiser, and we're looking, trying to figure out what to do, and all of a sudden the spider from the middle of the dashboard just goes down in between the two seats, between myself and the FTL, so we're standing there,
[00:12:22] totally bewildered what to do, and then all of a sudden the police radio started going off, and we realized that even though we had this big dilemma, and we're both terrified of spiders, the job still goes on, and if that radio is going and someone needs a cruiser for some sort of call for service, we both come back in that cruiser, and for the rest of the night we were driving around with our feet and hands in the air, but just thinking about that, it kind of amplifies
[00:12:54] that when you're there to do the job, you're there to do the job, and no matter what happens while you're there, you're going to get the job done. Great, thank you, I appreciate that. Thank you ma'am. I just have one final question, because I think you've touched on a number of different things, and my question is, as you think about a Hingham police officer, and you think about the qualities that would be important to be a successful police officer here in Hingham,
[00:13:23] what qualities jump to mind? I would say honesty, compassion,
[00:13:31] and being humble is every person that you deal with, you need to bring all three of those to the table, and even though you're wearing a police officer uniform, that may make you feel a little bit more brave and different, you've got to remember that every person you're dealing with, they could be a veteran, they could be even braver than you, they could be a doctor, a really
[00:13:57] influential school educator, and you just need to bring that humility to every call that you go to, and even though you're wearing a police officer uniform, you've got to treat everyone with utmost respect and dignity. And the honesty? That's completely probably one of the most fundamental parts of being a police officer, is your honesty and integrity.
[00:14:22] Without that, there's no trust, and without respect, every call you go to, you're going to be your own worst enemy, and you're going to be creating problems rather than solving problems.
[00:14:38] Mr. Campanelli, thank you very much. Thank you. And we will, the board is, we're conducting the interviews this evening, and then next week we will be putting this back on the agenda to make decisions. So again, we so appreciate your coming in this today. Thank you for having me. Thank you.
[00:14:57] Thank you. And so our next candidate is Mr. Benjamin Carr. Welcome, Mr. Carr. I'm Karen Johnson. This is Mary Power. Welcome. Mr. Carr. Would you like to take a seat right over there?
[00:15:26] Mr. Carr, thank you for coming in this evening. We're going to take about 10 or 15 minutes. We're going to ask you to, if you could please, lead off by introducing yourself, telling us a little bit about your background, telling us about why you're interested in becoming a police officer in the town of Hingham. And then each of us will take turns asking one or two questions. And then at the conclusion, we'll give you an opportunity to ask any questions or make any final remarks
[00:15:54] that you'd like to. So with that, I'll turn it to you for an introduction, please. Okay. Thank you very much. My name is Ben Carr. I grew up in the town of Hingham. I graduated Hingham High School in 2007. I went on to Stonehill College where I graduated in 2011 from Stonehill. I majored in religious studies and history. Since then, I have worked in higher education.
[00:16:21] I did that for three years at Curry College as an admissions counselor, probably my favorite position that I've held thus far in my career. But I've also had the opportunity to work in sales, as well as working in advertising and software at the moment.
[00:16:36] The biggest reason why I would like to be a Hingham police officer is I've always tried to find the things in a career that enable me to have some sense of fulfillment when I go home. And I can't think of a better place to be a police officer than the town I grew up in a town that basically helped raise me. I was fortunate enough to grow up in a very close-knit neighborhood. So to have the opportunity to be a police officer in Hingham and give back to the town and give back to the people who looked after me when I was growing up would be
[00:17:04] an honor for sure. Thank you. Karen, would you like to start with a question or two for Mr. Carr? Sure. Mr. Carr, you know, very, very impressive resume, really impressive work experience. I'm wondering if you could talk a little bit about your educational experience and how that may help shape you as a candidate between Hingham High and Stonehill College. What about your
[00:17:31] education do you bring to the table as a Hingham police officer? That's actually a really relevant question for me. I've been reflecting a lot recently, having gone through the process. And when I went to Hingham High School to pick up my transcript, I asked the woman who worked at the desk if I could visit one of my old teachers. And this teacher had taken me to Ireland when I was senior in high school. And that had really kind of kicked off this travel bug with me,
[00:18:00] which later led me to studying in Ireland and then feeling comfortable enough to take a risk and having lived abroad. But I definitely was shaped by Hingham High School a lot. And I was very grateful for that. And I felt lucky enough that I was able to connect with her to tell her how much of an impact that she had for me. You know, Hingham High School was,
[00:18:24] it gets a lot of credit. Having worked in higher education, I've compared it to other schools as part of my job. And I do feel that the high school prepared me very well. I felt like I was a step ahead once I got to college. And particularly with that abroad experience, not in high school, not quite being on my own, but with a group and having that sense of independence, I felt much more comfortable once I got to college and was able to challenge myself
[00:18:51] in more public speaking roles, whether it was a tour guide or working rec sports games or even as an official for NCAA volleyball matches. I was pretty comfortable standing in front of people making a decision, feeling confident in my decisions. And I attribute a lot of that to my sort of grooming through Hingham High School. That's fantastic. And you know, good for you for taking the opportunity to seek out your teacher and say thank you. I feel like it's sometimes
[00:19:20] easier not to go to that trouble. And I can only imagine how that faculty member felt when they saw you. First of all, as a grown up guy, second of all, coming in to say thank you. I think that's a tremendous gesture. And sort of jumping off from there, as you considered this position,
[00:19:40] the role of a police officer in Hingham is important not only for law enforcement but to the community as a whole. And I wonder if you've thought about the role of community policing as you've considered this job. I have, absolutely. Working as an admissions counselor, a big part of my role was actually in sort of helping to develop the community at the college so that students would feel more comfortable. I sat on the diversity committee as the admissions
[00:20:07] office representative. And we would do different programs to, you know, help students, feel more comfortable students who were, we referred to them as multicultural students. Other colleges called them Alana. But in order to create that greater sense of community, really make it feel at home. As a police officer, I know it is very important to, you know, really be a face, be someone that the public can see you as, get to know you. So that way, if anything's happening, they feel
[00:20:35] comfortable calling you, flagging you down. Or even if it's something that they are just thinking,
[00:20:41] hey, there's something going on, can I talk to you about it? Building that trust within the community is obviously something that I was strived for and is obviously very important as well. Great. And one last question is, you know, again, looking at some of your experiences, your work experience, your experience living in Australia. I'm wondering if there's something in your professional experience or in a challenge that you may have encountered and overcome
[00:21:07] that you think adds a dimension to your candidacy as a Hingham police officer. I think my current role would probably have the most challenges. I came into my current company at a very much a transitional period. So that company developed different procedures and operational processes, or processes, in order to make the workflow run smoother, be more effective,
[00:21:32] more efficient, and ultimately more profitable. That's really been the biggest challenge is establishing those processes and making them work and also documenting them as well. Great. Thank you. Mr. Carr, good evening. How are you? Good. How are you? I'm all right. You say you went to school in Ireland for a period? I did, yes. I went to the National University of Ireland in Galway for about four months.
[00:21:59] Nice. Tell me, sir, when you served as an admissions counselor at Curry College,
[00:22:08] what were the qualities that you look for in students? And do you see any parallels in your own candidacy for the position of police officer here in Hingham? Yes, absolutely. You see parallels. One of the biggest things I looked for in a student, working at Curry, it was a different student population that we attracted than Stonehill, where I went. We were getting students who had struggled in high school oftentimes. We had a
[00:22:33] very strong support program for students with language-based learning style differences. So a lot of the students hadn't had the support that they really needed in order to succeed in high school. And we found a lot of those students would do very well once they got that support structure and actually learned how they learned best. So for me, a big thing was whether or not a student was hardworking, if a student was excited about the opportunity to go to college,
[00:22:59] or if they felt like they were just going through the motions because that's what they were expected of them. And also, I wanted to see students who would improve throughout their high school career, and obviously someone who's involved as well, someone who's going to really add to that community. I've always been a hard worker. I don't know if you folks have my resume. I think I've had two jobs consistently since 2012. I've worked consistently
[00:23:25] since I was 16. And I've always been someone who's strived to improve no matter what I've done, whether it was working in a pizza place when I was in high school, learning all the different roles within that restaurant, from just cleaning, being a server, working in the kitchen, to doing inventory, all the things that then led me to eventually run that restaurant.
[00:23:53] So I do think that I guess selfishly looked for students who had similar qualities to myself because I felt like I had done well in life, and I knew the students had those qualities they would also do well. One last question, sir. I noticed from your application that you majored in religious studies, so I want to pose a question to you. Sure. At West Point, there's a monument
[00:24:24] of sort with the inscription, a cadet will not lie, cheat, or steal or tolerate those who do. As a police officer in the town of Hingham, what would your code of conduct be?
[00:24:39] It would absolutely be very strict. I'm not somebody who has ever compromised my own morals. I always stick by them in high school or college if it came to, you know, underage drinking or whatever that case may be. I had opportunities. I stuck with what I felt was right, and I would do the same as a police officer without question. Thank you. I know. You should go.
[00:25:09] Good questions. Two questions for you, Mr. Carr. First, you know, as someone who's grown up in this town and, you know, you've had professional experience in different places, but as you think about the police department right now in Hingham, what sort of challenges or issues are we facing as a community? That's a really good question. I'm not sure I have a great answer for
[00:25:35] that one. So as you think about some of the issues that the police officers face and what might make a police job challenging, what sorts of things come to mind? Because I think, you know, when you were growing up in Hingham, you know, we've been here 17 years and it feels like it's changed. And you've experienced Hingham, you know, as a child. So as you think about being a police officer, what – I do actually have an answer for that one now, I think, about that. I think it's
[00:26:03] a much more public image that police officers have. And, you know, with social media and everybody pulling out their phones at every instant, I think officers do have to hold themselves to a higher standard and really rely on those morals in order to, you know, maintain that – maintain being a trustworthy figure in the town and someone people can rely on rather than seeing as somebody who is just out to get them, which also then goes back to community policing and
[00:26:33] being a part and being present and just being involved. But I think making sure that you're not – that you stay in line, you stick to your morals, you stick to your code in an era where deaf people are not hesitant to pull out their phone and wait for you to do something wrong. Sure. Thank you. And my final question is, obviously from your work experience, you're someone who takes on a challenge, you work pretty hard at it. You know, how would – what
[00:27:03] aspirations would you have on, you know, coming into the police department in terms of your development as a member of our law enforcement team? My goal would just be to be as
[00:27:18] productive as a member of the force as possible. However, that leads me in a career path is however that turns out. But certainly always striving to be a better police officer, take advantage of training opportunities and just never stop learning. Thank you. And just before we conclude, do you have any questions for us or is there anything in, you know, the course of our
[00:27:46] conversation that you wanted to mention? No, I'm just very grateful for the opportunity to be here tonight and just wanted to thank you very much. Well, we appreciate it as well. So we thank you and next week the board will be making decisions. So again, we appreciate you coming in this evening. Thank you very much. Thank you. And our final candidate this evening is Mr. John Thomas.
[00:28:18] Mr. Thomas, welcome. Mary Power, nice to meet you. Oh, yeah. Oh, thank you so much.
[00:28:33] That's fine. Thank you. If you'd like to sit right over there. Thank you. Mr. Thomas, what we'd like to do will take about 10 or 15 minutes. We'll start by asking you to just please introduce yourself to the board. Tell us a little bit about about you, about your experience, about why you're interested in becoming a police officer for the town of Hingham. Then we'll each take turns asking
[00:29:00] one or two questions. And at the conclusion, if you have any questions for us or anything else that you'd like to add. So if I may, please, could you just tell us a little about yourself and why you'd like to be a Hingham police officer? For those of you who don't know me, I'm John Thomas, and I'm born and raised here in Hingham. And I went through Hingham Public Schools, graduated from Hingham High School. After that, I did a year of college at Dean College in Franklin, Mass. I then immediately started working for my father's company right in town.
[00:29:32] And that's when I started working closely with Hingham Police Department. And I have family and family friends in the police community. So kind of why I'm into it. Thank you. Paul, would you like to start? Sure. Can I call you John? Yeah, sure. I've known your father for a number of years.
[00:29:59] Tell me something, John. What do you think your experience working with the police
[00:30:06] is done in terms of insights into the police world or the police mission? I'm talking about here in Hingham, obviously. Yeah. I think that brought me to a lot of situations where you have to work quick and you see a lot of things that a lot of people don't see. And it just makes you a well-rounded, hard-working person, I think. And yeah.
[00:30:40] What do you think about the concept of living in the community that you police?
[00:30:47] I think it's wonderful to be able to, if I did get the job, to be able to give back to your community that has made you into the person you are. In terms of the qualities of a good police officer, whether it's here in Hingham or anywhere where someone puts on a uniform with a badge and a gun, what are the three non-negotiable qualities that somebody who's a police officer,
[00:31:17] in your opinion, has to have? In my opinion, I would say compassion, integrity, and leadership.
[00:31:29] With truthfulness and all of that. But? With truthfulness and all of that. Is that? Integrity. Captain integrity. Okay. Thank you. Just a couple things. I notice, and thank you for this resume, because it contains, I think, some additional information. I wonder if you could just tell us a little bit about the work that you did at the Cardinal Cushing School in Hanover.
[00:31:56] So I worked with the handicap and the special needs there for community service for high school. And I worked closely with the older group. And you got to see a lot of things you don't see and work with people that you don't work with all the time. And it was good to work with people that are unfortunate. And just, you know, as you think about some of the experiences
[00:32:28] that you had there, and you think about becoming a Hingham police officer, are there things that you gained from doing that that you think might help you be an effective police officer? Yeah, definitely. Don't take everything for granted. And you also don't know what people are going through or struggling with. And, you know, in your experience, so, you know, one of the things that strikes me as I've
[00:33:00] had the opportunity to interact with the police officers, I get a really good appreciation for the fact that a police officer has to make a very quick assessment of a situation and a very quick decision. And in a lot of cases, you don't have the time or the opportunity to ask somebody what to do or to run it by somebody, which I've really come to understand and appreciate is
[00:33:25] pretty challenging. But in your work experience, you, you know, you experienced that to some degree as well. I just wondered if there was, you know, an experience or something in, you know, your professional background where, you know, you had to make a quick decision or a quick assessment on your own that might just kind of give us a little bit of a preview as to what you might do
[00:33:53] if you had that circumstance happen as a police officer. Does the story come to mind or an experience? Yes. Well, every day. Every day I deal with car accidents and all sorts of types of accidents. And you have to be quick with your thought and you have to be able to plan well and you have to be efficient. That's really it. Thank you very much. Karen? Yeah, I guess
[00:34:23] following up on Mary's question, you know, that one of the things I guess I saw when I did, I noticed in your resume, you did the Citizens Police Academy. I participated in that a fall or two ago. And one of the things that struck me particularly about the sort of accident scene demonstration was the precise teamwork. And as a tow truck operator, you're coming on that scene too and you're part of that team. So it's this combination, Mary, is Mary sort of mentioning of being able to
[00:34:52] make a quick assessment and quick individual decisions, but also be part of a team on a scene. And I guess I'm wondering how you see some of the qualities you have, the experiences you have, what would make you a good team player for the Hangle Police Department? Yeah, whether it's working with the police or working with other tow drivers that I work with,
[00:35:13] you have to be able to work through and plan quickly and effectively on how you're going to get the job done and get it clear so that the roadway is clean. Yep. And then I noticed that you've got a number of specialized trainings that I think are very relevant. I wonder if you could maybe talk a little bit about your EMT training, your firearms training,
[00:35:39] the time you've taken to educate yourself and to me put yourself on a stronger track to be a police officer. So I did an EMT course in 2013 and 14 and it was like four months. And I got through the whole entire course and you learned a lot. And I unfortunately didn't pass the national exam, but I'd learned a lot from it. And yeah, and then my firearms course, it's a lot of gun safety
[00:36:13] and even then I still practice gun safety, going to the gun range and all that. And so, good. Thank you. Did you have any questions for us or is there anything else that you'd want to make sure that we were aware of? I don't have any questions. I just want to thank you for this time and this opportunity. I'm grateful for it. We are grateful too. You know, I think an important part of
[00:36:41] community policing is having the opportunity to have people who have grown up in this community and who know this community step forward. And I think when we have candidates such as yourself who have been in Hingham, it really just helps the police department with its mission. So we know that there are a lot of different options that are out there and we're very grateful that you're considering coming to work for the town. So we thank you so much
[00:37:10] and we'll be making our decision next week. Thank you. Thank you. So there will be some additional work being completed by the police department. We will take this matter up again
[00:37:32] next week. And how nice to see that we have three local people coming forward. It's really nice to see. So we have a forecast update that's scheduled to begin at 8 o'clock when the advisory committee is going to join us. So what I'm actually going to do is to take up our possible votes. I believe we might have an appointment, Selectman Town Administrator reports. So our first
[00:38:01] vote is Lincoln Day. And Lincoln Day this year in the town of Hingham will be on Saturday, February 10th. There will be a ceremony at the Old Ship Church at 11 o'clock. And then we will process to the Lincoln statue. And it is customary for this board to sign a proclamation. And while
[00:38:27] it's long, I seem to remember that you've read this in years past. I have and I'd be happy to do so. Oh, terrific. The board is so inclined. All right. Ladies and gentlemen, citizens of Hingham.
[00:38:43] This is the town of Hingham, Massachusetts proclamation. Whereas the town of Hingham was settled in 1635 by a small band of Puritan pilgrims, many of whom came from Hingham, England and environs. And whereas among the descendants of those original settlers were two famous American public figures who shared the common family name Lincoln, as well as a common heritage. And whereas
[00:39:12] it is a longstanding Hingham tradition to honor and celebrate their birthdays, General Benjamin Lincoln, a lifelong Hingham citizen and hero of the American Revolution, and Abraham Lincoln, our 16th president and the towering figure of the Civil War. And whereas we honor and celebrate the lives and deeds of the two Lincolns because of the indelible legacy of community building
[00:39:39] and preservation they have left for us. And whereas in this year, 2018, we pay special honor to four centuries of our citizens, those famous like Benjamin Lincoln and Abraham Lincoln, and those unknown to history who worked in a myriad of ways to build and sustain this wonderful community of Hingham and the broader communities of state and nation. And whereas the preservation of community
[00:40:10] is a perpetual task in which each generation must fully participate. Now therefore, we the board of selectmen of the town of Hingham do hereby officially proclaim Saturday, February 10th, 2018, Lincoln Day. We urge also that as many citizens as possible join us at the Old Ship Church on Saturday, February 10th, 2018, at 11 a.m. for a patriotic ceremony of celebration.
[00:40:44] Finally, we urge each citizen to take to heart the examples of the two Lincolns and those of four centuries of Hingham citizens. And we urge each citizen to participate in some concrete way in the strengthening and preservation of this community of Hingham and the broader communities of state and nations for the generations which will succeed us.
[00:41:10] Given under our hands and seal of Hingham this 30th day of January, 2018, Mary Power Chairman Paul K. Healy, Karen A. Johnson. Thank you. I've got a tough act to follow next Saturday when I have to read this at the Old Ship. I would like to make a motion to proclaim February 10th, 2018
[00:41:36] as Lincoln Day in the town of Hingham. So moved. Second. All those in favor? Aye. Okay. We have two votes. We have a vote for a license. Do you want to do the appointment or no? Sure. Why don't we do the appointment? I'd like to move that we appoint Jacqueline Zane to the Conservation Commission to fill an unexpired term ending June 30, 2019. Second. All those in favor? Aye.
[00:42:05] I'd like to thank Ms. Zane, congratulate her, and say that we are looking forward to your beginning to serve the town. Yes, thank you very much, Ms. Zane. We have a license. Who will prove the issuance of a special one-day wine and malt beverages licensed to Diane Denapoli on behalf of Special Needs Athletic Partnership for the SNAP-St. Patrick's Day party to be held at the Hingham Community Center on Saturday, March 9, 2018 from 6 p.m. to 11 p.m.
[00:42:39] Chief's not here, but my understanding is he has approved this. Yes. Yes. Second. All those in favor? Aye. Aye. Okay. And then lastly, Tom walked us through the Town of Hingham Street Acceptance Policy. I believe that was at our last meeting, and as we do with a lot of these, we decided to hold off. I don't believe there was any feedback
[00:43:07] from the community, and I believe that Attorney Murphy received confirmation from staff that everybody was comfortable with it, Tom. Yes, it's been fully circulated. Everyone was comfortable with it and received nothing from the community. I talked to Tom separately and Susan Murphy as well. Okay. We're good to go on this? Move to approve the Town of Hingham Street Acceptance Policy for insertion in Board of Selectment policies and procedures manual. Second. Any further
[00:43:35] discussion? All those in favor? Aye. Okay. So let's, why don't we do Selectment and Town Administrator Reports. Tom? Do you not want to vote Article C until later? You want to wait on that? I think I'm just going to wait only because… I just don't want to forget it. Yep. Only because that's posted at 9.15. Okay. So if people can help remind me, we don't miss that.
[00:44:01] Tom, Town Administrator Report. Sure. So in the Good News category, we have a couple of grants to announce from this week. The Hingham and Citru Boards of Health working together have received an 18-month grant for $25,000 from the Blue Hill Community Health Alliance. This will address a hoarding disorder, associated clutter, and the related stigma through public health education and clinician-led online treatment groups.
[00:44:30] The data will be collected by the BU School of Social Work and be published in a peer-reviewed journal article. We've also received an engineering grant through the Town of Hingham's Engineering Department, acting through the Board of Selectment. We've received a $50,000 Planning Assistance Grant from the Executive Office of Energy and Environmental Affairs. The grant will augment and offset the town's costs for the ongoing efforts associated with designing, engineering, and permitting resiliency improvements to strengthen the
[00:44:58] coastal infrastructure within Hingham's inner harbor. And if anyone was down the harbor this morning with that tied, you'll see why this is a timely grant to receive. We had some minor coastal flooding down there this morning. And finally, I just wanted to thank everyone over at the Hingham DPW for their efforts to clear today's storm. This was a tricky storm. It came in a little bit late, around 6 a.m., or a little bit earlier, right at the beginning of
[00:45:26] the morning commute. It was a heavier-than-anticipated storm, a lot of high winds and drifting. And, you know, we got 110 miles of roadway and 60 miles of sidewalk that these folks have to clear. And when you're out treating them and all of a sudden you get a heavier-than-normal storm and you've got to go switch all your equipment to plows from treatment equipment, it's a heavy lift. And they did a great job today, I thought.
[00:45:53] Yeah, and I feel like then they switch back to treatment at the end, you know, when it started to get cold this afternoon, the salt trucks would back out there. So it's a really, really great job. And I would just add to that that our preparation for the storm this morning actually began about 2.30 this morning, which is when all of the crews were out sanding and salting the road in anticipation of the snow and waiting for it. So, you know, that's a very long effort. And
[00:46:21] I suspect that there are some people who have not been home for close to 24 hours because, as Tom said, we have 110 miles of roadway and 60 miles of sidewalk. Thank you. Anything else, Tom? That's it. Thank you. Paul?
[00:46:40] I'm throwing off my game because I thought this was going to be done at the end. Okay. Do you want me to go to Karen? Sure. Okay. So a couple things. On the sort of work side, I'm continuing, really, to concentrate my efforts on some veterans' issues with Keith German and Father Bills, as well as some affordable housing issues with the Affordable Housing Trust, the housing and the Housing Authority, and, again, with Father Bills. So that's sort of the bulk of my office time.
[00:47:09] I'd like to give a couple of shoutouts. One is to Lily Fardon and Team USA, the U18 hockey team, who won gold medal in Russia about, I don't know, a couple weeks ago. Really, really fantastic effort. It was fun to keep up with that news. And then on the veterans' front, I'd like to say that both the wrestling team and the girls' basketball team this week will be honoring our veterans at
[00:47:34] their matches in basketball games, respectively. Wrestling is tomorrow evening, I think around 6.30, and the girls' basketball game is this Friday evening at 6.30. And, you know, you've talked about the veterans' appreciation club at the high school, you know, the fact that these sports teams are taking special time to recognize the outstanding contributions of our veterans, I just think is admirable. So if you can get out and support our teams and our veterans,
[00:48:01] that'd be terrific. Okay. I'm going to give you a couple more minutes. I'll do mine and then no pressure. No pressure. I wanted to just mention that, first of all, the Mass Municipal Association, the MMA, had its annual meeting a couple Fridays ago. Tom attended, I attended. Jay McGrell's in the audience for something that's coming up along with Emily Wentworth. And this is a day-long
[00:48:27] conference with colleagues. We heard the governor speak. We had a chance to attend workshops.
[00:48:34] I attended a workshop, actually, on public safety with the Chelsea Police Chief. That was just fascinating. I attended a legal update so that I could keep up with my two colleagues.
[00:48:49] It was just a really nice opportunity. I also attended a women's elected official breakfast, and it was really nice to see the number of women who are in leadership positions in the Commonwealth. So it was really a great day, a chance to share best practices, network. There's a trade show component where a number of Hingham's partners were there, and it's nice to catch up with them in that setting as well. I don't know if, you had anything
[00:49:18] to add about the MMA. Yeah, it was the same for me. I always love the trade show in there. You get to see the breadth of services and equipment that's used to keep municipalities used to keep municipalities running across the state and I got to attend some wonderful budgeting seminars as well as social media use. These are all burgeoning topics that are important to stay on top of. And I would also say that in looking at some of that, for example, I was at this one about the police force and as they were sharing a lot of best practices and different things, I found myself with many of them saying, yep, we do that, yep, we do that.
[00:49:54] And it actually was very, not just a chance to learn some new things, but it just reinforced to me how well-run Hingham is, which is a great credit to our teams. Last Saturday, we're in the middle of budget. We're going to do a forecast update in a minute. I attended the school budget discussion with the advisory subcommittee and the school committee.
[00:50:20] We spent about three hours on a Saturday morning talking about the school budget, which I'm grateful for everybody's time. I would mention to the public that tomorrow evening, beginning at 7 o'clock at the Hingham Middle School, is a Hingham education forum that is being sponsored by the six PTOs across the Hingham Public School. And this is an opportunity to ask questions and have dialogue about many things.
[00:50:48] Our appreciation to members of the school committee and members of the school administration and principals for making themselves available for what is going to prove to be, I think, a very informative evening. Before I turn it over to Mr. Healy, I'd also mention on a more somber note that within the last three weeks, Hingham has lost three citizens who have contributed to our community
[00:51:15] in many ways, through working for the town, through volunteering for the town. And we regrettably lost Tom Studley and John Stoddard and Willis Eartman. And on behalf of the board and town, we offer our condolences to their families and our gratitude for the many, many contributions that each of them made to just make this community
[00:51:40] a better place. So Paul, anything else? You know, no, no, I think I'm good. Just because I'm not talking doesn't mean I'm not busy. I've said that before, and I'll say it again. We all work in our respective roles as selectmen, addressing inquiries that the town makes and serving its needs.
[00:52:05] I was outside Saturday, as I'm sure many of you were, enjoying the weather, and one of my neighbors came over and he started providing me with his opinion of an issue in town. And he stopped himself and said, gee, I really apologize, you're on your day off. And I said, as a selectman, I'm never off, so go ahead and keep talking. And that's how it is, you know, if people have a beef or a problem, you know, you pick
[00:52:35] up the phone, my number's in the book. So that's all I really wanted. Yeah, I was going to say, make sure you call Paul. Or a compliment.
[00:52:46] Thank you. Stay open on occasion. So I think it's 8 o'clock and the advisory committee has joined us and we welcome them. Before we get into the joint session on community preservation, we're going to do a forecast update. And just for the audience, one of the things around this time of year where we're working, the advisory committee is working on settling the town budget.
[00:53:13] And in an effort to try to share a little bit more information, but also recognizing that people are watching from home, and sometimes the page of very small print really doesn't show up very well on the TV screen. So what we've tried to do, and we've got it up on the screen, is to just put together a little bit of an overview presentation. Others of the advisory committee have copies of our very detailed forecast document.
[00:53:43] We also have additional copies at the table, so anyone is more than welcome. But Tom is just going to kind of walk through a little bit of where we are, and then I'm going to touch on one thing at the end. So turn it over to you, Tom. Thank you very much, Mary. Okay. So again, in an effort to try to simplify the forecast, which can be complicated, we tried to break it down into a more understandable flow.
[00:54:11] So the financial forecast for Hingham is generally split into two categories, one revenue and the other expenses. And so the revenue outlook in town, and we have a comparison for the projected FY19 versus the anticipated FY18. So the tax levy in FY18 was approximately $80 million, with the projected 19 tax levy
[00:54:36] of $82.3 million. Other revenue from 18 was $27.4 million, and in 19 we're anticipating other revenue dropping to $27.2 million. For total forecasted revenues in 18 of $107.4 million, that's $107,400,000. And for FY19 projection of $109,500,000.
[00:55:03] So expenses, and it's important to understand that we're still early in the process. These budgets are still being reviewed. So these are the early expenses, and this includes a simple 2 percent increase over the prior year for the school budget. And obviously that will change to some extent as we go through the budgeting process. But for now, in these numbers, you're looking at a simple 2 percent increase. So in articles 4, 5, and 6, you're looking at an FY18 number of $103.5 million, with the
[00:55:36] projection for FY19 of 106.5, capital L-A of 2.2 in 18 to 2.3 in 19, and with a total of other categories equaling $1.4 million in expenses in 18 and $1.5 million in 19. And that brings our totals to about $107.3 million in expenses for 18, with a projection
[00:56:05] of 110.3 in 19. So in 18 we saw a slight surplus at the end of the process of just about $100,000. And in 19, as of today, we're budgeting, we're looking at about an $800,000 deficit. However, that will change, and I'll go into that here in a minute. So our next page, we recapped some of the revenue numbers, and we summarized that.
[00:56:33] So you're looking at approximately, in revenue, you're looking at approximately a 2.1 percent increase. I'm sorry, a $2.1 million or 2 percent increase over a prior year anticipated in revenue. So updates since the first forecast was presented back in November. We're looking at a decrease in our new growth projections of about $325,000.
[00:56:58] That's largely due to some of the larger projects in town not being built on the timeline we were anticipating earlier in the year. And that includes some of the ones down in Shipyard, Avalon, Breo, Lindenponds Building, et cetera. So state aid, we got the, Mary and I were at the MMA in Boston last week, and we heard the governor's budget presentation, and he's looking at approximately for the town of Hingham
[00:57:25] of about $188,000 increase in state aid this year. Now again, that's the governor's budget, subject to change as it goes through their process. And then local receipts. We're looking at approximately $280,000 increase over last year. Motor vehicle, to break that down, you're looking at about $150,000 anticipated increase in motor vehicle, excise tax, the meals tax of an increase of about $80,000, and $25,000
[00:57:54] in each in licenses, fees, and permits, and ambulance fees. So the potential updates to the FY19 budget, as I just stated, the state aid number is a projected number right now. It's just the governor's budget, still has to go through the entire state review process. So that's subject to change. The local receipts, the FY19 local receipt forecast, it's important to note that we're looking at about just under 95, so 94.8 percent of the FY17 actuals, which was the last actuals
[00:58:26] the town has realized. You know, 95 percent is kind of our threshold. We don't like to project a whole lot higher than that. It gets iffy as we learned in 2008 across the state. Higher projections can be dangerous.
[00:58:44] Okay, our next slide is a simple pie chart trying to explain how revenue, the revenue components, where they come from. So if you're looking at the largest piece of the pie, the 70 percent of all revenue coming in is coming from the tax levy, approximately 10 percent from state aid, approximately 8 percent from local receipts, 5 percent is the country club and sewer.
[00:59:11] It's important to remember that those are offset by their enterprise fund. And then 4 percent from the excluded debt and 2 percent through other categories, including new growth. It's very important that we at this time note that we do not expect additional significant revenue change. The large revenue changes just occurred, right? So between November and this forecast, those are the largest revenue changes we're going
[00:59:40] to see. Okay, so expenses. This is the other side of the forecast. These haven't been as flushed out yet. We're still in the middle of the process. The school department will be coming in next week for a joint meeting with the board in ADCOM here in this room next Tuesday. So we'll probably get some new information at that meeting. But for now, again, to recap, we're looking at expenses of 107.3 million in 18 to 110.3
[01:00:12] million in 19, or a $3 million change equaling approximately 2.8 percent increase. And again, that is with a school budget increase estimated at 2 percent. And we know that that will be higher. So what does that mean? So the updates since the last forecast, there haven't been any expense updates, which is why we're looking at the same numbers. The potential updates, and this is really where a lot of people are probably thinking, yes, this is likely to change.
[01:00:39] The group insurance, we don't know – haven't received that number yet from the GIC. So the town joined the GIC, which is a state health plan provider last year. We haven't received their anticipated change over last year yet for this coming year. We hope to receive that in late January. So that number will change as a potential expense. The education budget, we've seen some presentations publicly both on the school committee and
[01:01:08] others where they're projecting about an additional increase over what we're proposing in here of another $2 million to bring their total increase to approximately 6.1 percent over last year. Now, again, that's not in here yet simply because it hasn't gone all the way through that process. Capital out rate recommendation, we haven't received that yet. They're coming in in a couple of weeks, and they'll – we'll go through their
[01:01:36] process as well then. The town budget recommendations, right now the administration proposed budget does include a $264,000 in additional requests beyond my message of level service budget, and that equaled approximately a 3.9 percent total increase. Okay, what are the next steps? So on – next Tuesday, February 6th, we'll be holding – the selectmen will be holding
[01:02:01] a joint school – a joint meeting with the school committee and advisory to flush out the school – the school's budget. That presentation and discussion will occur again next Tuesday in this room. In mid-February, we hope to hear from capital out rate. And in late February, early March in that timeframe, we haven't got the dates yet. All three of those – the selectmen, the school committee and advisory will be voting the budgets.
[01:02:27] Okay. Before we – yeah. So do you – Paul or Karen, any questions for Tom or any comments? Yeah, I mean, it may be a little granular at this stage of the game. But maybe you and I can chat and we can bring it back next time. But I'm wondering about the carrying of the meals tax within the local receipts line
[01:02:55] item. Is that where it's all baked in there? So there's no separate meals tax stabilization fund like the meals tax reserve that I see carried through FY19? So the meals tax reserve that is going through 19 was the first – we accumulated about $2
[01:03:21] million in the meals tax fund before we moved them into local receipts. And the idea was to give that back over about five years to just sort of smooth it out. So next year will be the last year of that. The other meals tax are in the local receipts number of $9.9 million. The detail is back on – I think it's page four. And the meals tax amount right now, Tom, it's $800,000, right?
[01:03:49] Yes. $800,000. Okay. And I'm sorry, Tom, you said those numbers are being carried at 94 percent of actuals? Yes, 94.8. 94.8. That's the overall. The actual – yeah. So by category – The meals tax number specifically, Karen, was at 99.3 of the 17 actuals. Okay. But overall – so overall in the aggregate, local receipts are being carried at about
[01:04:19] just under 95 percent of actuals, right? Is that what you're saying? Yeah. Yeah. Okay. I mean, you know, so just so everybody knows, right, the forecast group meets. But because we have three selectmen, we can only have one selectman in the forecast room. So I said to Tom just the other day, I was glad that this was, you know, coming up
[01:04:47] at this time because, you know, we sort of operate outside this level of detail. So, you know, I appreciate the presentation tonight and, you know, I am going to spend some time with it and we'll likely have a question or two. I'm always here for you. I know you are. Appreciate it.
[01:05:09] I mean, if you look at it, if you were to roll in all the numbers that we have right now, we have a $2.8 million deficit right now, which is, I think, a little larger than we've had in past years at this time. We've had them over two. But it – at least for me, it feels like it's within reach. It's more challenging this year. I think we've been talking for three or four years that revenue growth was going
[01:05:36] to slow down, and I think we're seeing that materialize. And so we are going to – we're going to have our work cut out for us. And you know, as you look at the components of revenue, as Tom said, you know, with the local receipts and the new growth, if we are too aggressive in forecasting those amounts, there's no other place to make up that revenue.
[01:06:05] We would have to dip into our fund balance, our rainy day fund, and that got us into some trouble 10 years ago, so we don't want to do that. And that's why, as we're looking, for example, at our local receipts, we don't want to be overly aggressive. Two years ago, as an example, ambulance fees kind of dropped off unexpectedly to the tune of a couple of hundred thousand dollars because of some changes in – I think it was
[01:06:30] Medicaid. So you know, I would just affirm with this board, we back in – I think it was October and November, we talked about the fact that when we had the forecast review back in November, we said this was the revenue that was on the table, that we didn't envision any sort of an override, we didn't envision applying any of the unused levy capacity
[01:06:57] because that was offsetting the cost of the middle school. I guess I'm just kind of looking to my colleagues. I haven't changed my mind on that. Unnauting in agreement. Yeah. No. I mean, I think that's the message everybody got. Frankly, in November, this is the pie that we had to work with, and no, I had no
[01:07:22] appetite for that. And just to sort of dimensionalize that a little bit, I mentioned that I was at the Saturday advisory meeting with the school committee, and there was some conversation about, you know, how Hingham kind of compares to other communities, and we know we like to do a lot of benchmarking in this town. We're good at that. It's one of the reasons we're a AAA, and what we do is we take 20 communities,
[01:07:48] and the personnel board identified these communities many years ago, and some of them are geographically close to Hingham. Some of them are comparable in size and demographics to Hingham. Some of them, perhaps, a little bit different in terms of demographics. So we have some communities like the W communities, Wellesley and Weston, that perhaps are a little more affluent than Hingham.
[01:08:14] We have other communities that are nearby. And you know, there was some talk about, well, you know, how do we compare, and, you know, does that mean that, you know, we have some opportunity with revenue? And I mentioned some numbers off the cuff that had been done about six or seven years ago, and went back after and updated it, and I just want to share this with my colleagues and with the audience for a second, because I think it paints the picture for
[01:08:40] why this board is saying that the revenue we have is the revenue we have. So if you look at, Hingham, up at the very top, if you look at our 2017 fiscal tax bill, it's $11.77 for every $1,000 of assessed value. So that's how our tax bills are calculated. And you know what? If you go and you compare that to the 20 towns that are listed on the bottom of the screen,
[01:09:07] we are number 18 out of 20. Ours is one of the lowest. And, you know, I would like to think that that's part of what attracts people to Hingham. The property values can be high, but relative to some other communities, we have a fairly low tax rate. But I think just looking at that tax rate by itself doesn't really tell you a lot about Hingham. So let me take it a step further. Our average single family property tax bill in FY18 is $9,489,
[01:09:37] where we're ranked number 11 out of 20. So while our tax rate is lower compared to some of our peer communities, because of the value of our properties, the tax bill checks that we all write is a little bit higher. Comparing the median household income for all those communities, Hingham's median household income is $106,854,
[01:10:05] which ranks us 12 out of those 20 benchmark communities. And then the last piece I just say is, so let's just think about putting ourselves, you know, we're all tax payers. So what that means is if we take our average property tax bill against our household income, for somebody in Hingham, your property tax bill is about just under 9% of your total budget, your household budget.
[01:10:34] And what was noteworthy to me is that when I compared that to the other 19 benchmark communities, we are ranked number six. And so what that says to me is that as we're thinking about our revenue picture, and we're thinking about the citizens in this community, we need to understand against a backdrop of all of this. That for many households in Hingham, the existing property tax bill is a big burden.
[01:11:00] It is a bigger burden to a household budget than it may be in other communities. So while our tax rate might be one of the lowest, we need to keep in mind the check people are paying and the proportion of their income. And understand that in this community with many seniors and with many young families, the median household income,
[01:11:26] I think we have a little bit more economic diversity than some of our other communities. And there are a couple other things we need to think about. We need to keep in mind the new tax law. Remember that for the property tax exemption, the combination of property tax and state tax, it's a $10,000 limit. Our average tax bill is just about 10,000. So I think some people, probably a lot of people on the advisory committee,
[01:11:54] you already know what the impact of the tax bill is on the tax law on your tax bill. But I think what we may find is that there are people who could be adversely affected by that.
[01:12:07] I think we also have to keep in mind, again, as I said, the percentage of household income. And the third thing I think we all have to remember too, is that we have a lot of capital projects, very worthy capital projects that we've talked about before. We've talked about the wharfs, we've talked about a school, we've talked about town hall, the library, fire stations.
[01:12:30] Country, potential numbers, $50 to $80 million. And when the advisory committee was with us a few months ago, they talked about the fact that within our budget, we've got room in the next five years for about $16 million of projects. So what that says to me is that if those large capital projects move forward, we might be in a position where we have to ask the taxpayers if they would be willing to pay for those things.
[01:13:03] What that says to me, all the more important, is that we have to live within our means with the revenue that we have. We have to keep the taxpayers in mind, we have to understand, just keep some of the stuff in mind. And so as we're moving forward and we're looking, while I think we may have a little bit of a challenge with the budget,
[01:13:29] what that information says to me is that we have a responsibility to keep all this in mind as we move forward with what may be some difficult decisions. I think it's a really helpful slide, Mary, and I appreciate you and Tom taking the time to pull it together. I think they're very useful metrics. I think it gives you a visual of, I think, the feeling that we all have, and it gives you a visual and some data to analyze it against.
[01:13:59] So I appreciate both you and Tom taking the time to pull that together. I would echo that. As I said before, when people speak to me from this town, that's the one consistent message that I get uniformly across the board. It costs money. I said at the school committee meeting that the dilemma for a lot of us in this room and our advisory colleagues, people in town would like great services, really nice stuff, and low taxes.
[01:14:29] And those three things aren't necessarily all compatible. So the job we have with our school committee partners as well is to figure out how do we strike that balance as we move forward. And we have always done that in a collaborative way and we look forward to doing that again. Anything else on this? Okay.
[01:14:54] So next on the agenda, so many of you weren't here when Paul Healy so eloquently read the proclamation for Lincoln Day, but there was one line that I thought was a really good introduction to our next topic. In our proclamation, we talked about the preservation of community is a perpetual task in which each generation must fully participate. And that's what we're really about to do right now with the community preservation.
[01:15:22] So I'd like to invite Carol Piles and Lucy, we thought maybe, if you wanted to come up to the table, so as we're going through projects, and Jim, welcome. We thought, if you're probably more comfortable sitting. I'm going to be giving the presentation, too. And if I could just ask before we started, and Carol, maybe we'll ask you first,
[01:15:54] but you have members of your team at the table, you have members of your team in the audience. I just ask you to introduce the members of your committee and your team, and then Lucy, if you could please introduce the members of the advisory committee that are here this evening. These groups of people have been working pretty long hours, pretty hard to do great work, and I think it's important that the community knows who's behind all the great work we're going to see.
[01:16:30] Or behind us, okay. Go ahead, yes, sure. Hi, good evening. I'm Carol Piles, chairman of the community preservation committee. To my right is my vice chairman, Jim Conroy, and Carol Costello, who makes us all look good.
[01:16:45] And is Roger coming tonight? Do we know? And Roger, okay. And other members of our committee who are here tonight are Dan White and Jim Watson, and Larry Lindner, and Bill Harrington, and then the others in the committee who are not here, Becerra Corey, and Bob Mosher, and Vicki Donlan.
[01:17:13] We're delighted to present such good projects to you this evening. This is really a challenge because these chairs just...
[01:17:23] Before you start, if I could just ask Lucy to introduce the members of the advisory committee. No, it's the whole...
[01:17:30] Right is Donna Smallwood, vice chair.
[01:17:33] In the front row over here, we have Bob Curley, Aaron Kelly, Evan Sheehan, next row, Julie Streli, George Danis, Dave Anderson, Nicole Streli,
[01:17:48] Victor Balterra, next row, Libby Claypool, I'm looking.
[01:17:53] Dan Coughlin, is there anybody between you? No, okay. And Tom Bellier. And I think we're missing one person, two people. I don't see the other two yet. Did they get here?
[01:18:05] No. Okay. Did they miss anyone?
[01:18:10] Okay. Thank you, Lucy. So you will be changing the slides as we go along, Carol. The first thing we want to talk about tonight is that CPA has been around since 2000, and we joined early on. We were one of the early towns. And so since 2003, we have been able to devote $22,211,000 back to our town
[01:18:38] in terms of historic preservation, open space, community housing. And then in 2013, recreation was also added, so those projects have come in. And you can see on that first page the percentage. And we still have the same challenge we had last year when we presented to you. And that is we desperately are trying to get community housing share of the pot
[01:19:03] a little higher. And we were maybe able to do that a little bit more this year.
[01:19:09] Okay. The next page is just some random pictures of some of the projects that we'll be presenting to you tonight. We call it bills and pools, but you can, as you can see from the picture.
[01:19:20] The next page is CPC recommendations to the town meeting for 2018.
[01:19:28] And we'll go through each one of these individually, but they are our administrative fund, Hingham Affordable Housing Trust Opportunity Fund, Conservation of Historic Town Documents, Hingham Cemetery Erosion Control, Memorial Bell Tower Mechanism Repair, The Old Fort House, that's the Richardson House, archaeology and installation, Harbor Walkway Extension, the Hull Street Field Play Area,
[01:19:59] and the South Shore Country Club Pool and Construction Design. And in our numbers you will notice we go through that our debt service payments are also included. We're paying off the Heritage Museum at 165,000 plus per year, and the Lainer property at 315,000 per year. Cara, can I just ask you, do those debt service payments count in the category of the projects?
[01:20:27] Yes. Okay. Yes, they do. Sorry for the interruption. Okay. On the next page we have the community preservation committee revenue, and luckily it adds up to the same number as we had on the last page.
[01:20:41] And of course this comes from a 1.5 percent surcharge on your property taxes, and so that first number, a million, 11,594, is this year's collection. The state contribution for this year is 174,000, and we have accumulated in reserve and clawed back from unfinished projects 388,000, so that all goes into us having a million, 573,
[01:21:13] and change to spend this year. And if you break it into categories, which is always a very interesting look, you realize that our community housing has gone way up this year. We were able to truly fund them at a level that made us very happy. Historic, open space, and recreation, which adds up to the same number. Okay. So the first is our own community preservation committee administrative fund,
[01:21:44] and it's $50,000 this year. This account enables the CPC to operate, quite literally. We couldn't do it without them. The CPC Act allows a total of 5 percent of the town's annual CPA budget to be used for administrative fund.
[01:22:01] This request, and there's a typo here in the next line, this request is a total of 4.2 percent, not 2.4 percent,
[01:22:11] of available funds for this year, that $1,000,185.
[01:22:17] This is a rolling fund that does not coincide with the fiscal year. These funds are available at any time for unexpected legal fees, costs associated with CPA projects. And the one question we always get is why the legal fees so high, especially since we have three lawyers on the committee this year, but that doesn't affect us. That's used for the town council service, land deed registrations, closing costs,
[01:22:46] conservation restrictions, surveying, and land acquisition expenses.
[01:22:54] Okay.
[01:23:00] We were able to put together $464,500 for them this year. The proponent is the Hingham Affordable Housing Trust. The scope is funds are set aside in the HAHT Opportunity Fund to assist with creation and preservation of affordable housing in Hingham. I think you all know what that is. Any questions?
[01:23:25] Yeah, so for the Opportunity Fund, I know with some of your other projects you talked about, you talked about a clawback. With the Opportunity Fund, is there some presumed length of time that the housing trust would need to... Not necessarily, although this year, because we had given them money in the past for a project on Beale Street, which I think you all and others have said, please hold up on that.
[01:23:51] So that put it in a lockbox for them, and it was a big chunk of money. So with discussion with them and a vote, we decided to take that back and re-gift it this year so it goes into their Opportunity Fund, which they can use for anything. If it had stayed where it was, it was only for that particular project and they couldn't have used it for anything else. So that helped us get their number up higher this year. And so what's the net grant, aside from the clawback funds then?
[01:24:18] What's the new money this year? Well, they're 10%, which is $118,000. I don't have the numbers right in front of me. But their clawback and that adds up to $464,000. Plus, is $106,000 in new money? I think, yeah. I'm sorry, I don't have the exact breakdown from it. Okay. Yeah. So a combination of new plus reuse of their old money
[01:24:44] plus the natural 10% that they have to get. Okay. Okay. And the sort of that clawback circle allows them greater flexibility in the use of the originally granted funds. They can use it for anything. And if the Beale Street property comes back online again, they can use it for that too. Great. Thank you. Okay. Jim's going to give us the next presentation.
[01:25:11] Okay. So this is phase two of a three-phase project, possibly a four-phase project, to conserve and fortify the ancient town records that we have in the clerk's office, which date back to the middle of the 17th century.
[01:25:31] Last year, 10 bound volumes were restored, conserved. This year, we recommend $3,050 to fund the projected cost of restoring another dozen of those volumes.
[01:25:47] And you can see from the slide and the handout that they are ancient and fragile and subject to loss if they're not conserved and cared for. So the conservation is done by a professional who repairs rips and bindings and fortifies, weak pages and such, came in under his estimated cost last year.
[01:26:13] And we're hopeful of not doing that, at least not exceeding the $3,000 this year. And next year after that, the hope is to,
[01:26:24] if not, deal with the remaining 50 volumes that have not yet been dealt with, which are a little later than at least maybe half of those and then finish it up the year after that.
[01:26:37] So is there any plan to digitize any of these records? There is talk about it, but there is no specific plan as yet. It's quite costly to do that, but that is the hope and the longer term goal. Okay. And storage at the town clerk's office. So once the volumes have been repaired, stabilized and fully conserved, are there any sort of special care that the clerk needs to take
[01:27:03] or we should be taking in order to preserve the volumes once they've been conserved?
[01:27:08] I'm not aware of any special hermetically sealed chambers or anything of that kind. But there is talk and discussion about a longer range hope to store and conserve all of the town and possibly the historical society documents in one place.
[01:27:27] But for the moment, the conservator is confident that the conditions in the town clerk's office are adequate. Yes. Okay. Thank you. They are being stored in acid-free boxes. Yeah. Sounds good to me. It sounds better than like acid. It's dark.
[01:27:46] The next one.
[01:27:48] Cemetery, Ham Cemetery erosion control. If you look at, you'll probably all recognize the place we're talking about. It's the corner, a corner of the cemetery adjacent to the Old Ship Church. It's been described to us as sort of a confluence of three historic assets, the cemetery itself, the Old Ship Church, and the bell tower, which all come together at that point.
[01:28:16] The immediate concern is the erosion of that slope that you see on the slide.
[01:28:23] Some of those hilltop graves will end up in that driveway
[01:28:27] if they are not contained and controlled pretty promptly. And many of them are 17th century graves. And the cemetery board looked at a number of alternatives to try to stop that erosion control, but that's their first priority of a multi-year plan for the cemetery. But that one's the urgent need because of that continued erosion.
[01:28:54] And they considered a stone wall to retain that space, but figured out in their own calculations that that would be prohibitively expensive.
[01:29:05] And also, I've heard that there could be a kind of an echo chamber effect from those bells bouncing off a stone wall.
[01:29:12] So they've opted for a shrubbery-oriented containment system. Instead, have engaged Sean Popich, landscape architects, to advise them on that. And they are advised that those shrubs will do the job and be adequately irrigated and such. So that's a $15,000 recommendation that we came to.
[01:29:39] And you said that this is potentially the first in a multi-year plan? Yeah, but I suspect that most of, not all of that, will be handled by other grants and by their own resources.
[01:29:51] Don't know that for sure, but in the near term, we're not being asked to do any more than that. Landscaping and such is up to them. Is there any risk that the root structure or the shrubbery would disturb the vaults? Apparently not. No, I asked that question too. They're going to be building out with a lot of soil first. So the embankments like this will bring it out and then do the planting.
[01:30:19] And next is a memorial bell tower mechanisms. So behind Old Chick Church, with the graveyard behind you on the left, this is the 75-foot brick tower that you see. And it contains 10 change bells. Now, bells ring in a lot of ways. You can hold the bell steady and ring the clanger. You can ring the bell itself. Change bells are pulled by ropes
[01:30:45] and go up into an open mouth, they call it, position in the sky. And then when they pull the rope again and it takes a whole person pulling down on it, the bell comes down, hits the clanger, makes one sound, it goes back up again. And that's what change bells are. These are very rare and very unique. They are direct copies of bells from Hingham, England. So in 1912, when the town decided to do a memorial tower
[01:31:15] for the 275th anniversary of the town, money was collected. It was just donated from everyone in town. And they built this 75-foot tower and put the change bells up there. The bells are perfect. Nothing's happened to them. No one shot at them or anything over the years. They're great. But the part they sit in, if you can see the red on the picture, that part has been wearing out. They're open to the air and eventually that iron gets rusty
[01:31:42] and they need to be replaced. Now, out of the 10 bells, only two have become very difficult to ring. And bell ringers who really know what they're doing can barely get them to work anymore. So we're going to start with these two. We know they'll be back to us in the future for the rest. But so far, they're able to ring them. And these are the two they want done. They were made at the Whitechapel Bell Foundry in London, which also made the Liberty Bell and Big Ben.
[01:32:10] So they're very famous. They're wonderful bells. The smallest one is 550 pounds. And the biggest one is 2,262 pounds. They're enormous and wonderful to hear. That sound, even if you don't live in that part of town, you can hear the sound when there's church events and town meetings and they're rung for all kinds of things. And these bell ringers are a wonderful group.
[01:32:36] They're part of an international group that comes to visit and they trade information and they ring each other's bells. It's a terrific group. So somebody said this may have been the last sound that our Hingham founders for our town heard when they left home would have been the ringing of these bells when they took off in their ships to come to America. And here we have the replicas of them
[01:33:03] making the same sound. That's very touching, I think. So anyway, we want to help them get up there with a crane and repair the first two, knowing they'll be back to us over the years to get the rest done eventually. Where will the repairs take place? Which one? Well, where will the repairs take place? The bells don't go anywhere. Okay. They go up with a crane. It'll go inside, take the mechanisms out, replace the mechanisms, put the bells attached again.
[01:33:28] And we tried to get them all done at once this year because we thought once the crane's there, what's the point? But they really don't need them at this point. And as you'll see, we had lots of things to do with the money this year. So I have a question. Is it okay now? Or should I wait? Go ahead. Just what was the work that was done to the Bell Tower within the past eight or 10 years? I don't recall. It started to... It started... The tower itself started to twist, as I understand it.
[01:33:53] Carol and the DPW can tell you more about it. But they went in and put a floor of steel to help it from sort of twisting. Just the movement of the bells alone was enough to start to make them worry about cracks in the building. I think Roger Fernandez is here.
[01:34:11] We'll see how we did with that explanation.
[01:34:15] Were we good?
[01:34:17] We were trying to wing it. We were trying to wing it. So, concisely, the Bell Tower was experiencing some structural issues in large part because these bells are very heavy. Some of them weigh over a ton, a ton and a half. And the tower would sway. So we engaged the services of a structural engineer. Essentially, we installed a new structural concrete floor slab, if you will, within the building itself that stabilized the building.
[01:34:43] There were some additional masonry repairs performed on the building. So the good news is, hopefully, the new bells or the repair mechanisms, when they do wing them, they're not going to cause the building to sway abruptly. So that was what was done. And that was CPC money as well? That was CPC money. Yep, yep. Okay, thanks. You bet.
[01:35:04] Okay.
[01:35:07] Now, so at one point in Hingham, there were three forts in town on the highest three hills. And one was up on Old Fort Street. And one was in the Hingham Cemetery. You can still see a stone foundation up in there. And nobody's quite sure where the third one was. But these were protection for the town from incoming invasions. Very early on. So the Old Fort house, after we didn't need the fort any longer,
[01:35:34] was moved about half a block downhill. They must have rolled it on logs and set up as a home. And over the years, many people lived there since it was built in 1685. Obviously, there were lots of owners over the time. But the last owner was our dear friend John Richardson, who everybody in town knew was a wonderful historian in town and saved a lot of Hingham artifacts in that structure.
[01:35:59] When he died, the building was going on the market and the Hingham Historical Society joined up with the Historic Commission to save the building. And you may have all been there, but they put it on a flatbed and they rolled it down North Street and they put it down on a temporary stone foundation on the property of the old ordinary until they had time to figure out where it would go permanently.
[01:36:24] Well, now it's time. It's been four years sitting there on this sort of wobbly foundation. At the time they moved to Fort, they also took the capstones, the giant granite stones that were the top of the foundation and they've saved them. So this money is to put the old Fort house back on its original capstones in a permanent location so the town can come through and visit it.
[01:36:51] It's remarkable inside. It has all its original beams that still have the bark on them. It's just wonderful to see but they haven't been allowed to let the tourists go through because it was not on a foundation. So this is really two parts. They will go in first and do a localized archaeological dig to make sure they're not plopping it down on top of a gravesite or something. And then this will be brought in
[01:37:18] and put down permanently on its capstone.
[01:37:21] So I hope you can see what the picture is. That's the old ordinary. The picture on the right, that's kind of bad on there, but there's the old ordinary is in the front. The big white area is the parking lot. The thing that looks like a checker board off to the right is the gardens that the garden club maintains and in the red circle in the back is where the house is sitting now. It probably will be somewhere close in that area. Again, depending on what the archaeologist digs up when he's in there. And this is 37,300 sponsored
[01:37:49] by the Hingham Historical Society. We had one abstri, one abstained on this vote because he is the treasurer of the Historical Society. The only one that did not vote for it.
[01:38:02] And my next one is the Harbor Walkway Extension. So you recall a few years ago, the trustees of Bathing Beach put in that wonderful walkway right running across between the parking lot at our harbor and the Bathing Beach. And that's the picture on the right of what that looks like now. This next extension being proposed by the Harbor Development Committee and the Bathing Beach trustees will be to take the next about 360 feet
[01:38:29] along the harbor till it gets over to the parking lot for the boat launch.
[01:38:35] And it's this continuation of this dream that they've had since 07 plan to extend a walkway for bikes and walkers and strollers and everything from one end of the harbor to the other end almost a mile long. And 110,000 will be more than they probably need for this first extension. for this first extension, but as you call this spring, the new bathhouse will be going in closer to 3A along that picture on the left. And so they'll do whatever they can with the money we're giving them, but they'll either have to get a grant to finish it or come back to us in the following year. Any questions? Okay.
[01:39:19] The Hall Street Field Play Area, as we call it, is an $85,000 recommendation. It's a projected play area, as it indicates. It's not complicated. It's on the site of what used to be a play area with swings and slides and things, but they deteriorated over the years. There's really nothing left of them now.
[01:39:46] You can see from the photo on the left, it's essentially a vacant field now. It's a relatively densely populated area down that end of town, and they have no play area in that neighborhood or really anywhere, certainly within walking distance or comfortable biking distance without crossing a lot of big streets. We were told it's the recreation department's top priority this year to get that done.
[01:40:16] They would manage it, maintain it on their own budget. And they've assured us that if there are any budget overruns, they would cover that out of their own funds. I just want to thank the Recreation Commission for this. You know, as you're driving towards Hull, you used to go by and see that kind of sad playground equipment. And as you said, it's densely populated. There are a lot of families, a busy road, and it just seems like this is going to get a lot of usage.
[01:40:48] And so really appreciate the Recreation Commission. You know, they've been at different ends of town and finding playgrounds in different neighborhood playgrounds in different places all across Hingham. If anyone's looking to see the land, it's right past Glastonbury Abbey on Hull Street. It's on the same side on the left. And all of a sudden, you come across this beautiful pasture, and you wonder, well, what's that sitting there for? That's where the playground will go.
[01:41:14] Carol, just a question on the location. It tends to flood over the years. Is this part of the plan to remedy the flooding risk? No, it's actually, if you look at the land carefully, it's in two layers with maybe a 10-foot dip. This is on the bluff. This is the upper level. Thank you. Closest to the street. They're going to repair the fence that's there so kids that are playing can't dash out into the street. The lower level is used as fields once in a while when, as you say, it's not underwater.
[01:41:42] OK. Thanks. This is for the upper level. Carol, just a question triggered in my mind with this and others. I remember a few years ago that down at the harbor with one of the projects, a sign was erected that said this project is being funded with community preservation. As all these projects advance, will that signage be put in place? It's on their contract. They have to do it. That's great, because I think sometimes as people see this,
[01:42:07] it's a really nice connection to see where this money is coming from. And not just on this, but on the others. We even give them the signs, don't we, Carol? There's no excuse for not keeping them up. Thank you. The big one. OK, the big one. I suspect that you all know as much, if not more, than I do about this project, because you've all been thoroughly educated, I'm sure. So I'll try to go through this pretty efficiently.
[01:42:35] We on the CPC were not only unanimously in favor of this, but I think there was really no reservations about it.
[01:42:45] I'll tell you why briefly, because I know you've heard most of this, if not all of it. In a summer or two, there will be no pool in the town, because it's really coming apart. And it's hanging on by masking tape, and should have been replaced long ago. It's, I think, indisputably would be a major town asset to have this facility in place there.
[01:43:13] Currently, there is no swim team venue to practice or to have meets either for the high school or for the Notre Dame swim team, no indoor pool at all, and no pool period, except between the 4th of July and Labor Day. So it's really a deficiency that is soon going to become a total deficiency if it's not dealt with.
[01:43:40] The plan would give us an indoor year-round lab pool, a warm pool, both for relaxation and for therapy, an outdoor family pool. Looks great for my grandchildren, and I'm sure others' children, to splash around in. And an indoor exercise and multi-use area for exercise machines, lockers, showers, and the rest.
[01:44:11] And I'm not sure it would do nothing but good for real estate values in the town. I can see realtors bringing people over there and showing them that facility. The costs, summarized briefly, we allocated or recommended $300,000 for this project, which is somewhat under half of the estimated construction document costs of $650,000.
[01:44:37] The reason why there was, I think, very solid support for that from a financial point of view is largely that there will be no slippery slope here because that money will not get spent unless several contingencies are met. One is that the supporters of the South Shore Country Club will raise independently the remaining $350,000.
[01:45:10] If they don't raise the money, the allocated funds go back to the CPC. The second point, they would then develop a long-range plan, a capital financing plan, before any construction goes forward and present that to you and work that through and get you all comfortable with that before any of that money gets spent.
[01:45:36] And if that doesn't happen and there's not a sufficient comfort level with that plan, then, too, that money goes back to the CPC and does not get spent. And the third element is an operating cost plan that would reasonably project the revenue to cover the operating costs. The belief at this point, with the help of an outside consulting firm,
[01:46:06] is that revenues would be likely to be generated to cover those operating costs, from user fees, from rentals of birthday parties and things, from therapy, use of the warm pool and other sources. So to sum that all up, we think it's undeniably a terrific asset for the town if it came into being. We don't see it as a risk at this point.
[01:46:34] It's essentially a financial placeholder until they make a case that convinces us all that the project is viable financially. And we gave them the full amount they asked for, and I would say as well that we really didn't, I think, shortchange any of the other applicants to get there. We had a challenging list of requests that was substantially in excess of the available money.
[01:47:02] But the weaker projects, if you will, kind of dropped along the wayside before they got to the final stage, and at the final stage, nobody got shut out. Most of the requests were fully funded. The ones that weren't, I think, were adequately funded to do what they immediately need to do this year. So we don't see this as a new responsible thing at all, and that's why we recommend it.
[01:47:30] Ms. Colby. Karen. Yeah, to your point, Jim, Bill Friend and Jay have come before us a number of times and sort of kept us up to speed, and I appreciate that because this is not only a significant allocation of CPC funds, but it would be a significant project for the town to undertake, so having kept us apprised, I think right along has been helpful and helpful to our decision tonight. I guess my question is, with respect to the three conditions prior to the expenditure of the funds,
[01:48:03] the vote language doesn't necessarily designate that. I don't know whether the Advisory Committee comment would include those conditions, but is there something in your kind of contractual relationship with the South Shore Country Club that would limit that expenditure? Yeah, well, Carol, you can speak to it directly if you like, or you can. She is, though, Mike. We can share. As we know, after town meeting, if this is approved, CPC puts together grant agreements,
[01:48:32] and each project has their own specific contract, and in that contract, we will have that language put in. Yeah, just a couple things. It's interesting, of all the different projects and things on the warrant, this is the one that, you know, people are talking about, people are asking about, and so I think this is a great opportunity as well just to confirm a couple of things
[01:49:01] that maybe we've known, but as people are starting to get interested. One question I had is, if these construction documents are prepared, what's their shelf life? And I don't know who's best able to answer that. I don't know if it's Jay or Roger, but, Jay, okay, and if you wouldn't mind coming to the microphone.
[01:49:27] The shelf life, I don't anticipate that the drawings themselves would have an extent short shelf life, but as part of the project, you do, there will be a requirement to undertake some certain permits, local permitting, certainly those permits do have a shelf life, but certainly if the project were designed, we don't anticipate that, you know, a year, two years, three years down the road, that the drawings would no longer be valid or,
[01:49:53] and the only thing that would change that is if there was a change in the building code or requirement associated with that change in the building code that might necessitate a change in the design. Okay, thank you, Roger, and Jay, maybe you could just come up because, again, I think it's really important that members of the public understand these conditions. So the construction document cost is $650, CPC is going to be paying for $300 of it,
[01:50:21] but that would not be spent until the remaining $350 is already raised. Yeah, so the game plan, we have the Friends of the South Shore Country Club, the 501c3, that we started in the last six months here. The plan for them is to try to raise the money by town meeting. That's our goal. It's a goal, obviously, you know, but it's clear we need the $300,000 won't get us anywhere in the construction document, you know, world as far as funding for what we need.
[01:50:49] So we need to raise the full $650,000 to move forward. And will the work on the construction documents, will the financing plan and the operating cost plan be required to even begin the construction document process? Yeah, I mean, absolutely, the conversation we had with these guys and from our standpoint is there's no point in spending a dollar of the $300,000 until we're all comfortable,
[01:51:16] everybody in this room, that that operational and financial plan makes sense and we have a clear path of how we'd like to try to fund this. Obviously, the funding will come down to town meeting, but, you know, our plan would be that everyone in this room is comfortable with at least what that strategy is. Well, and the revenue projections, you know, sort of influence the design and vice versa, right? You've got to have some revenue drivers in there to be able to support the operation.
[01:51:41] And that's why it's changed quite a bit over the last few months. Yeah, that's what I was going to ask you. When we looked at just a six-lane lap pool with the outdoor family pool, financially speaking, it just was generating a loss. When we added the addition of the warm pool, the therapy component, along with the fitness facility, it allowed us to raise our membership fee and also look at additional revenue from therapy that brought it to a really good financial plan. I mean, still, we're at a point right now where we're tweaking stuff.
[01:52:08] We're working through potential opportunities with some different groups that would lease or license space from us that would help us with a lot of that revenue and it would also tie it up and be more sustainable. So if we had issues with economic downturn and things like that, we have existing contracts in play that won't change, you know, that tie to some serious revenue as part of the plan. So we're still working through a lot of this. The final feasibility study, although we're, you know, 75% complete,
[01:52:36] there's still another piece to it that we need to finalize and that should be done by the beginning of April. Hopefully, like, April 1st would be our plan. And I just reiterate that the plan here is that this is self-supporting. I've had questions from people who have expressed concern that this project might compete for capital dollars for fire stations or a school, and that's not the case.
[01:53:02] Yeah, and I mean, right now, we're working on trying to get the financial plan to be operational, you know, in the black. Obviously, there's a large capital ask or component to it, and that's part of the conversation we'll have to have with you guys about how we're going to move forward with that. You know, definitely, the club has the ability to take debt on through this project. There's definitely a large fundraising component to it, but it may not cover all the capital needs,
[01:53:28] and we'll have to have some sort of conversation about what we should do with the remaining portion of the capital costs. But just to then, to bring it back to the original point, which is that the construction documents and that work will not begin until there is a financing plan, and that financing plan, we're going to have public discussion about it so that interested people can come and participate. Not a dollar of that will be spent until we're all on board
[01:53:54] with what that financial plan is. Thank you. I just think that that's helpful clarity for people who are hearing about this for the first time. And on a more mundane note, what's the food service component going to look like? So Raffiels has the exclusive food and beverage little property, so as long as they're still our food and beverage provider, it will be solely through them. It will probably be some sort of more glorified snack shack type of thing.
[01:54:20] But one thing that we've looked at with the multipurpose room is being able to utilize that room in the evening for like group corporate meetings and things like that. We've had a lot of success with that in our function halls, and sometimes the size doesn't fit with what we currently have. So that's something that we'd be able to do over there as well to add to the food and beverage component of it. Lucy, I don't know if members of the advisory committee have questions on this project.
[01:54:47] Anyone else from the advisory? Well, Jay is. Sure. Raise your hand if you do. Sure, there's lots of questions. I may not have all of them tonight, but I'm certainly working to try to get through them. Nicole? Nicole, could I just trouble you to come up to the microphone because that way people at home can hear your question. And identify yourself, please. Sure. I'm Nicole Raffelson.
[01:55:12] I'm on the advisory committee. I'm asking this question or sort of reiterating some of the points that have been made just because as a municipal analyst, back in the dark ages of my career, I looked at a lot of feasibility studies. And they were for large projects. This is a small project. But typically, in a feasibility study, you see stress testing on revenue projections. And I guess my one concern as not as a citizen as a citizen,
[01:55:43] I love the idea of a pool. But I guess as a finance person, my one concern is that health club revenues are economically sensitive. And if we get into not if, when, recessions are just normal things that happen, are the revenues going to be so tightly balanced there that there could be an event where you're coming to the town looking for money
[01:56:09] at the same time that the town's revenues are being stressed by an economic downturn. And we have a deficit at the pool. And we have all sorts of potential type budget things that we're dealing with on the other side. So I guess I would want to see a fairly robust feasibility study talking about the revenues and what the assumptions are
[01:56:35] that are going into memberships and things like that. And I guess as an advisory committee person, the first time through this, I would want to see a copy of the CPC contract that says those three conditions. And really, the fourth condition being that the capital financing plan will be in place before any of the $300,000
[01:57:01] is spent from the CPC. Because that's a lot of money to put towards something if it's not definitely going to go forward. And I would hate to think if any of it was spent and it didn't go forward what kind of feedback we would be getting about that. So that's a long comment. But those are my thoughts. Thank you. So one part of looking at what you just mentioned is when they built the projections as far as membership,
[01:57:29] he looked at the capture rate of the area. And he went at what it seemed like when we were talking a fairly low percentage. It was like a 3% to 5% capture rate of the area. And that's based off demographics, age, what the population is, and the proximity around the club. And the consultant that I was working with thinks that the 3% to 5% is a really low target to look at. So there's a lot of room to grow there.
[01:57:55] And then also, when we looked at building the financial plan, for the first three or four years, our utilization, we're looking at only like 60% utilization as we watch the business grow. And those are the years where we generate, obviously, the least in the financial plan we have right now, the least revenue. So if economic downturn happened, I would like to at least think that in a business like we're in right now, where the price point's a little bit lower than it is with a higher end private club,
[01:58:22] similar to our golf business, where we're more of like the $50 round to golf instead of the $150 round to golf, becomes a little bit less sensitive to economic downturn. But hopefully, our utilization rates, where we're estimated to be on the low end to begin with, would just stay on the low end. And that would be the worst case scenario type of thing. And then as far as the fourth point that you brought up, I think the plan that we have right now is that to be able
[01:58:51] to move forward with the construction documents allows us to be able to buy time with the failing pool. If we were able to come up with a financial plan that the selectmen are comfortable with, that advisory thinks makes sense, the last component of that would be the town voting on it and approving it. Our plan would be to hopefully have the construction documents done by that point in time in a year from now, basically. So that when the town approves it,
[01:59:18] and it would be the last piece to that puzzle, we're ready to break ground and start building a new pool. And the reason why we've set that timeline is because of the failing facility we have. And there's a concern that if we did a design and build project together, we don't start that process until the town approves it in a year from now, or a year plus from now, that we could potentially
[01:59:44] be two years away from breaking ground at that point, or another year, two years from today, or two years from April away from breaking ground. So that's kind of why we structured the timeline the way we did, so that we'd be able to, rather than have a design, build project, design, get town meetings approved and start building to help us in that timeline. So it's a different approach, and I worked with Roger to kind of come up with that idea. But it's what I think makes sense
[02:00:10] based on the failing structure that we currently have. But then also to speak to the concern of the whole thing, like the financial plan has to make sense enough that we don't set ourselves up for failure in our enterprise fund is we've solicited. I was fortunate enough to find out and get in contact with the people that did the feasibility study for the Wellesley Pool that they just broke ground on.
[02:00:36] It's a much larger project. It's like a $20 million project. And scope-wise, it's different. But I got in touch with the financial group that did the feasibility study for them, and I contracted them to do peer review on our financials. So I think there's a very small group of people in the US that do this recreational financial analysis. And I have two of the most well-known groups
[02:01:02] looking at the same project and coming up with, I don't know yet what the peer review numbers will be and what he'll have to say. But by the end of the day, we'll have two groups that analyze it independently and came up with, hopefully, some. Right. My ultimate. Yeah. You know, so just to always bring that skepticism to it.
[02:01:30] And then I was curious about the advertising revenues because it's fairly significant budget flows from what you've forced in the pool area. So that's an opportunity, like if you go to the Weymouth Club right now, where you look at, there's something like this, like digital screens, where you have looped advertising going on. There's an opportunity to sell advertising to facilities like some of the local high schools,
[02:01:56] the private high schools in the area, private elementary schools in the area that are trying to target groups like us. So when I looked at, it's definitely something that we're interested in. It's an opportunity there, similar to like when you go to an ice rink and you see advertising around the ice rink. But it's hard to know how much money you're going to make doing that. It all kind of depends on how hard and how aggressively you work trying to sell that advertising.
[02:02:22] So I looked at what I spoke with the general manager at the Weymouth Club and looked at what they do in annual advertising and the different campaigns that they offer. And then also looked at that Wellesley feasibility study that they put together and came up with 5% of gross revenue is what they'd estimate as a campaign that makes sense in a facility about the size that we have. And that's what I, when I put together the Excel spreadsheet,
[02:02:48] that's what I based it off, is that 5% gross revenue number. I have members of my group that I'm working with on this that think that they could blow that number out of the water and get Herb Chambers and Ernie Buck Jr. up there spending thousands of dollars to advertise in our facility. But I tried to push that back a little bit and say, let's just go with at least what they said in the Wellesley study, the 5%.
[02:03:14] And that's the number that I used. We will have a chance to ask more questions when the community preservation folks come to visit ADCOM in a couple of weeks. So if there's nothing else that's urgent, I know the time is passing and you have other things on your agenda. Jay, thank you very much. I just had one, I guess one other thought as we kind of move forward and we think about the conditions and sort of check back
[02:03:42] in with the board of selectmen or advisory committee or both. So the quick notes I took, I think you mentioned that the long range capital planning would be potentially subject to consultation with the board or approval by the board. The revenue piece to me is very important as well. And so I just, as we roll forward, I wonder if there's a role for the board to play in terms of added skepticism of that analysis.
[02:04:11] So as it rolls forward, we may want to think about how we structure, I guess, review of the conditions as we move forward to determine whether the plan makes sense. To that, that's the guidance that I'm looking for. And I think that we should, before we get too deep into that, I'd like to get you the peer review analysis, too. So you have both independent things to look at.
[02:04:39] OK. Thank you, Jay. Thanks, Jay. Can I ask you a word? We'll be in. Yeah, that was good sequence. Yeah. Carol or Jim, anything else for us for this evening? Are you voting tonight? So we typically, on something like this again, and this is, I know you've had your hearings televised, which I think is very helpful for giving all these great projects visibility. But I think it's this board's practice that when we have some of these policy decisions,
[02:05:07] we'll defer the vote for a week because that gives the opportunity for the public to ask questions, give input. And so next week, I would envision taking this up. I don't envision, are having a lot of conversation. But if there is anyone in the public with a question or wishes to express themselves. So I think we would probably, Tom, vote this article
[02:05:33] next week. I just want to thank you for all your great work. I mean, it looks all nice and neat, all clipped together with the colored pictures. But I know there's been a lot of input, a lot of diligence, a lot of other projects that you've had to make some difficult decisions on. And as Mary said at the outset, and a couple of the projects that we got to talk about because the board of slackmen
[02:05:58] were involved in them earlier on, certain of these projects really stand out and make Hingham what it is. And so I just, on behalf of the town, I appreciate all of your hard work, really do. We have a wonderful committee. I just wanted to add, too, that by saying we wanted to make sure that you were comfortable with this whole project, I meant the plural you. As a former advisory committee chairman, I have to make that clear as well, not just
[02:06:25] the select one, but the other one. In this process, as we know, in many cases, advisory is a proxy for town meeting. And these are a lot of questions that might come up on the floor of town meetings. So having the ability to answer, contemplate them, be able to talk through them, I just think makes the process easier, particularly with this pool. This would be a big discussion to have on the floor of town meeting. And so it's to everyone's benefit.
[02:06:53] And we also appreciate the advisory committee joining us with thoughtful questions and comments. And I think you're going to go back to your meeting room. We're going to get together again a week from today for the school budget. Our board still has a couple of items of business. So we would just thank everybody for this portion of the evening. Good to see you all.
[02:07:18] Tom, as people are just moving out, do we want to just do Article C real quick? So Article C is a perennial article that covers the reports of the various town committees. We have some language here that I could propose to the board to consider. Do you want me to read it? Sure. So the article would be titled Reports of Various Town
[02:07:44] Committees. The article C to hear the reports of the following. Affordable Housing Trust, Audit Committee, Capital Outlay Committee, Commission on Disability Issues, Community Preservation Committee, Conservation Commission, Country Club Management Committee, Council on Aging, Energy Action Committee, Fire Station Building Committee, GAR Hall Trustees, Harbor Development Committee, Hingham Historic Districts Commission,
[02:08:11] the Historian, Historical Commission, Board of Managers of Lincoln Apartments, LLC, Long Range Waste Disposal and Recycling Committee, the Memorial Bell Tower Committee, Open Space Acquisition Committee, the Scholarship Fund Committee, the 2006 School Building Committee, Wastewater Master Planning Committee, and the Water Supply Committee that are acting on anything relating thereto.
[02:08:36] These are the committees that are formed by town meeting, which is why they're specifically called out. As you know, in the annual report, we tend to have reports from all committees as well as town departments. And I would just note that the recommended motion includes the discharge of the 2006 School Building Committee, which after consultation with the School Committee and that building committee, they said that their work was completed.
[02:09:02] So that would be part of the recommended motion. I was going to say, does that has to be voted by town meeting, right? Because it was created by town meeting. That's right. So there are no other bodies, because we've discharged a bunch of committees, but there are no other committees then. That's always like the type of checking. OK. I think we're good with that. Any questions? So should we vote? Sure.
[02:09:28] I move to recommend a favorable action on Article C as presented. All those in favor? Aye. OK. I didn't forget that. All right, OK. Now, I didn't doubt you. What's that? I didn't doubt you. So the last item on our agenda, and I'm going to turn it over to Karen, is an update with respect to the Hingham Housing Authority and a discussion about 100 Beale Street. Yeah, so shortly after I took office in May,
[02:10:02] Tom Mayo, Ted Alexiadis, and I met with Daveline Cooper, who is then the chair of the Hingham Housing Authority, to talk about the transfer of about eight acres of land on Beale Street. So to sort of back up, about, I don't know, 17 or 18 years ago, there were a bunch of bunkers. Some people in the town might remember
[02:10:27] in the land that was around Bear Cove Park in this Beale Street vicinity. And those bunker buildings had asbestos. They were a nuisance. You know, people were lighting fires in there. And the town determined that, for safety reasons, those structures ought to come down. So in the process of doing the diligence in removing those structures, the town realized that a couple of the structures were actually
[02:10:54] on land, about 18 acres of land, owned by the Housing Authority. So the town was then Charlie Cristello, who is our town administrator, approached the Housing Authority and suggested that those buildings need to come down and that the town could do it. But the Housing Authority didn't have cash to pay for that. And so the Housing Authority said, hey, well, we'll give you some of this land
[02:11:21] that we own on Beale Street because we don't have any need for it. And a certain part of that acreage, in any event, is wetlands. So I guess it was about 2001, the town actually entered into a contract with the Housing Authority to do just that. We'll take down these couple of buildings that should come down, and you'll transfer to the town about 80 acres of land. So in the midst of changes in town administrators and boards
[02:11:49] of selectmen, with all good intentions on everybody's part, the final I didn't get dotted and the final T didn't get crossed. And so the deed that would actually hand the land back to the town was never executed. So fast forward to 2017, 2016, 2017, in the midst of doing some diligence around the parcels owned by the selectmen on Beale Street.
[02:12:18] I think it was part of the board's earlier discussions of the development of the Beale Street property prior to the Alliance project coming online. Through town council, Susan Murphy, we did some diligence on what do we own, what are the property lines, what are the conditions, the kind of stuff you'd go through if you were going to undertake development of your property. So in doing that, it came to the town's attention
[02:12:43] that, indeed, this eight acres that we were supposed to get as consideration for taking down those two old buildings never came to the town. And so this past summer, as I said at the beginning, I talked to David Lynn Cooper, made her aware of this omission, and talked with her about making sure that we finalize this transaction. I
[02:13:10] think the buildings have come down about 18 years ago. And so now let's just finalize things. So we engaged in some conversations over the summer and into the fall. David Lynn talked with her board. Susan Murphy and I went to a Housing Authority board meeting to explain what we had found to present the board again with the contract that had been signed with the town to convey the land.
[02:13:37] And the Housing Authority board requested some additional diligence materials, which were in line with exactly what I would ask for if I were being asked to consummate this transaction contracts and actually evidence that the buildings came down, copy the contract, so that you can, as a fiduciary for the Housing Authority, check that off your list. We provided all of that stuff to David Lynn Cooper, again, as the then chair of the Housing Authority.
[02:14:05] She found it all in order. The pro bono attorney, I understand, works with the Housing Authority on other housing matters, found it all in order. And so the Housing Authority was scheduled to take a vote to transfer the property and to execute the deed in favor of the town for this eight acres. The Housing Authority instead took a vote not to transfer this land back to the town, I guess, at this time.
[02:14:31] And that was a three to one vote by the Housing Authority. So it puts us in a little bit of a dilemma. I think we have patiently worked through an issue that we discovered with the Housing Authority, trying to correct something that should have been corrected years ago. I don't dispute that. We patiently worked through our process.
[02:14:58] I worked through it on behalf of the board as your liaison. My role tonight was to report out how I did with that project, which wasn't too well, I guess, but to tell you that we're now in a situation where the Housing Authority has a parcel of land that really belongs to the town. So I think we're in a position, I guess,
[02:15:24] from my personal standpoint, we're in a position where we need to decide what steps we would take to move forward to get back and asset that belongs to the town. The thing that makes it a little uncomfortable is that the Housing Authority is part of us, even though it's a state agency with its own elected board. It's in Hingham.
[02:15:50] The people who live there are in Hingham. The volunteers are Hingham residents. So this discussion tonight is a little uncomfortable. That notwithstanding, this is a promise that the Housing Authority board made to the town. The town undertook work on the basis of that promise. And what we're asking the Housing Authority to do is fulfill its promise.
[02:16:16] So I think that I guess there's a couple approaches we could take to this. We could set a timeline to say, now that you fully understand the scope of this issue and the response that the town actually needs to take to get the land back, would the Housing Authority consider or reconsider its vote
[02:16:42] and actually effectuate the deed as a promise to do in its contract, or, and I hate to say this, or the other alternative is that the town would be in a position where it would have to sue its own Housing Authority. It would have to seek a declaratory judgment for specific performance in Superior Court or land court.
[02:17:09] So unfortunately, that's where we're at with this. And I don't know if I've done it justice or if you have additional questions, but that's my report. What was on the Housing Authority when they entered into this agreement with the town? I have it in my file. I can have you tell your buck key, your jacket.
[02:17:35] Hey, Aaron. Yeah, I can't read it. Anne Griffin, right? Anne Griffin. You got to hit the mic, Jim. Jim, if you wouldn't mind so that the viewing audience could go. Of course, I should know better. But you asked who was on the authority at the time. Yes. Jane Davis, who was the chair at the time. John Cafferty, who was the state appointee. Anne Griffin, who I think was a tenant.
[02:18:02] Myself, and right now, I don't remember who else. I'm going by the people that signed the agreement. Bob Keys. Yeah, Bob Keys. I thought I said that, right. So the remaining ones are Bob Keys and myself. The people who've been all along. And who's on the housing authority presently? Right now, I'm going down to three people because of devilish resignation and because of the tenant vacancy. So it's myself, Bob, and Erma Lauter,
[02:18:29] who's the state appointee. Just three people. And if I can just expand this under the open meeting law, we can't talk to each other at all. We feel your pain. We feel your pain. Excuse me, yes. When did Davalin Cooper resign? About a week ago, after the meeting that went badly. And I think she'd, well, there's a lot of issues.
[02:18:56] She had various reasons, very well thought out. But it's been about a week. Any other questions? I just want to make sure I understand the way it'll end. Thank you. You've invested a lot of time in this, as has Attorney Murphy, and appreciate it. And I share with you that we're sort of in an uncomfortable spot.
[02:19:22] And I guess my point of view, and you mentioned that in these different situations, we all have fiduciary responsibilities. And it's often difficult when you have boards that turn over and things are uncovered. And we were not on the original board that enacted a transaction. But that's really where I think we have to rely on the documentation and town meeting
[02:19:49] votes. And I guess I look at it and say that we have a fiduciary responsibility to the town, which is, I know we all take that seriously. And I know the Housing Authority takes it seriously. What I might propose to my colleagues is that this has been helpful while Thomas kept us apprised.
[02:20:14] It's helpful to hear this. I think it's been our board's practice that we typically don't, when we get a report out on something, we typically don't necessarily vote on something the night of a meeting. I know I'd sort of like to reflect on this. And I would maybe suggest that that would provide, I would propose a two week window at which it would also provide the Housing Authority with an opportunity
[02:20:41] to reconsider its vote if it chose to. So I might suggest that we put this on our agenda for two weeks from now, which is February 13, if that's agreeable to my colleagues. And I can provide you with, if you want the diligence package that we put together for the Housing Authority, I can provide you with that. So you can sort of step through and see exactly the decision
[02:21:09] timeline and, to your point, Mary, the property rights of the town that we really have no, we have no alternative here. We need to perfect the property rights of the town. May I make a comment, Madam Chair? Jim, sure. You just said what I was going to ask for. Because of the open meeting law, we can't talk to each other. And what I was going to request was a deferral of any action
[02:21:34] to give us a chance to have at least one special meeting where the three of us can talk. I can't guarantee any result from it. Sure, I appreciate that. But we have to do that. And my purpose of that would be to review all the issues around the site, the current issues, and to identify the actions that we need to bring about the conveyance. Many of us thought wrongly that that had been done
[02:22:00] and that it just hadn't been recorded for some reason. And there was sort of like a little folklore within the authority that, oh, yeah, nobody recorded it. Well, we didn't take the steps needed. And I talked to Sharon, our director today, and she was saying, right. We don't necessarily have the capacity to draft the deed and do the things that are needed. But in 2001, we agreed to do these things. And it's binding. It's still binding. So anyway, I would appreciate it very much. It sounds like what we're proposing
[02:22:27] would be that that would work as well. And I appreciate your coming tonight. And let me just offer that the night we met with you all in December, when Susan Murphy and I were with you, we indicated that Ms. Murphy would draft the deed that the Housing Authority Board could execute. In addition, Ms. Murphy has drafted the necessary vote that the board would need to effectuate the transfer.
[02:22:53] So we get that you don't have potentially the legal bandwidth. And we offered it. We have those materials. I can make that available to you tomorrow. I also want to say, Jim, that you've been very diligent and very thoughtful since we've, I think, been able to talk further about just what this means. And I guess I think it's important.
[02:23:18] I know there's a lot of noise around some of this transaction. There's been a lot of noise about development on Beale Street. I really think in this case, and I said this to you when we chatted on the phone a couple times late last week, this is a very narrow legal issue. And I really think you've got to put the noise aside and you've got to look at what the legal obligation is
[02:23:45] of the Housing Authority to the town of Hingham. And we can deal with some of this other stuff later and continue to have conversations about the concerns that have arisen around the parcel itself. But the legal obligation is the key to this particular transfer. I'm afraid I don't get everything that you're saying. I mean, I'm not just hearing it that clearly. But I guess myself as, I guess, acting chair by default
[02:24:14] or something, that I totally respect that. I was here with the meeting with Toretto. We totally agreed to it. And then we went into a passive mode and did nothing. And we were talking to Sharon tonight, our director, she was saying, we don't really have the staff capacity to know and bring about all the steps. And I'm saying, OK, fine. Let's have a couple special meetings,
[02:24:39] identify what is needed. And I think you were saying that perhaps you have the resources. We can get that to you tomorrow. We can get that to you tomorrow, Jim. We can get you the things that you need to get this done. We can give you tomorrow. Good with you very quickly. Yeah. OK. OK.
[02:24:56] And that's good, because that makes sure it's good. It takes away one impediment, right? Yeah. I'm sorry. Again, I can't hear it. I think I got to echo. It's hard. It's echoing in here when the special meeting is done. We'll get you what you need. Yeah, we'll get you what you need. We'll get you what you need. We're taking your chances. I can't guarantee there are two people's votes. Any issue has lots of issues. Yep, sure. But we call the special meeting and if we all get there, I'll ask for a motion to take whatever steps are
[02:25:22] required to implement what we agreed to, 16 years or so. Yeah. Thank you. Thank you. That's a lot of time for something. Yes. Terrific. All right. Thank you so much. Thank you, Jim. I appreciate it. I need you to ask us a little more time. It's just great. Good. Yep. We have a couple of weeks before we can do this. Yeah, I appreciate it. I am going to put this on for two weeks, so February 13th. I mean, and you're good at always coming to our meetings
[02:25:47] and sitting through, but particularly this time of year with warrant articles and other things like that, we have a number of things the board wants to take up. So it would be my intent to take this up on the 13th. It's two weeks. Yeah, thank you. Thanks, Jim. Paul, did you have something to add? Yeah, Jim, if I may.
[02:26:14] Can you hear me? OK. Jim, I've known you a very long time. I believe you to be an honorable man. I respect your strength of character coming in tonight for this very difficult conversation. I think that sets you in a special place. I urge you to prevail. I'm thinking of my nominee in papers in a minute.
[02:26:40] I urge you to prevail upon your colleagues to recognize the difficult conversation that you've just had with us and take the necessary steps to correct what we will just call a hiccup so that we can go forward and continue to work together collegially. The best you can do is get the leaders together. Sure. And what are they? Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My pleasure, sir.
[02:27:06] Thank you, Jim. Thanks, Jim. Appreciate it. Hey, he's not leaving me tonight. I've got to go to the academy. Jim, watch the cord, OK? Good time trip. Yeah. Thank you. OK. And I would suggest, Karen, if you've got that information and maybe give it to Tom to circulate that would be helpful. I think, actually, I'm just double checking.
[02:27:31] I think we've concluded the agenda for this evening. So we will next meet a week from tonight. And a portion of our meeting will be business with the board. We will, in this room, have the joint school budget hearing with the school committee, the advisory committee, and our board. And so we thank everybody for joining tonight.
[02:27:57] I'd accept a motion to adjourn. So moved. I'll work the date again. The date of that meeting. Jim, our next meeting is on next Tuesday, February 6. Yeah, but 13. 13, February 13. Take a motion to adjourn. So moved. Second. All those in favor? Aye. Good night, everybody. Thank you. Good night.
